This episode is brought to you by curiosity stream,
a subscription streaming service that offers thousands of documentaries and
nonfiction titles right now, for a limited time,
you guys can get 25% off the cost of a subscription, more on them in a bit.
It was the scandal of the century in 17 France.
The aristocratic world was rocked by allegations that spy of the former king was
now threatening to sell state secrets to the British,
but it wasn't the attempted extortion that really gripped high society so
much as the identity of the blackmailer. The Chava Ador had been many things.
Soldier diplomats champion fencer in the 1770s, though,
there was just one part of their identity.
The world was interested in was the chal really the chal air.
In other words, were they male or female?
The answer to that question would overturn popular notions of gender identity.
Born biologically male Deon spent the first half of their life publicly living
as a man, but then came the black male case. And everything changed,
proved in court to be female Dion spent their last decades,
not just living as a woman, but legally considered one under French law.
So how did this happen and what significance might it all today?
The ans lies in one of the regimes, most exciting thought provoking stories
In the twilights of her life.
The Shali a Deon would look back on the strange circumstances of her birth with
a rice smile. Although born female, her father forced her to dress as a boy.
In's play act the part of a young male in a noble French family,
an episode recounted in her unpublished autobiography. Yeah.
While the Shali may have felt this to be the truth about her childhood,
that's not how her family saw it as far as they could tell their baby had
arrived. Male born on October the fifth, 1728,
the Shali Dior came from a family that was both aristocratic and desperately
short on cash.
And yes, I know Shal a is a French title, not typically conferred on babies,
but since the birth name was Charles Genevieve,
Louis Timothy eon Beaumont,
I'm just going to use Shali a to make all of our lives just a little bit
easier, especially mine, despite his family's relative poverty though,
the time and plays may have been perfect for the young Shali a,
this was the reign of Louisie the 15th,
the time of glorious stability and confidence in France.
It was also an era when notions of gender among the upper classes,
at least were far more fluid than they'd ever been.
This was an age when male courts were expected to dress a femininely and an
anate sexually ambiguous manner.
It was also an age from which the cult of show Nova was stronger than ever all
over France.
People were intimately familiar story of a young woman dressing as a man in
order to wage war for the Chava,
these nuances around gender would have a profound impact on his later life
beacon of which it's time. We briefly address the issue of pronouns today.
It's considered polite when covering trans people put to use their preferred
pronoun the whole way through. So if someone was biologically female at birth,
but identifies as male articles on him would normally use he from the get go.
But because the story of the Chava takes place in such a different time.
It's not really clear if this is suitable,
especially since Deon may have considered themselves male at some points and
female others,
all of which is a really roundabout way of saying that we're going to follow
historical presidents and use he for the pops when the Chava lived as a male and
she for the late parts, looking forward to the comments on this episode, anyway,
that out of the way Deon's early life was most notable for how brilliant he was
at. Well, just about everything. During his studies at Paris's college to quo,
NA the boy earns an arm of degrees by 19.
He was a practicing lawyer by 24, he was publishing essays to Rae reviews.
He was also a champion fencer who despite his slender androgynous appearance
could best almost anyone in a deal. Yes,
it wouldn't be swordsmanship legal expertise or writing ability that brought the
young Yon to the King's attention.
At least not according to his version of events in 1755,
the Shali supposedly used his connections to get invited to a bull.
The SI arriving dressed as a woman.
He accompanied the King's mistres Madam PON Peor into a private room before
seducing her that done.
He returned to the party where Lou the 15th in turn promptly tried to seduce him
good story as this is maybe bunkum the Chevalier was a
notorious teller of tall tales,
but whatever really happens not long after the party Deon found himself invited
in on the King's little secret, be known as the secret Duar.
The secret in question was a network of spies and back channel diplomats,
the blue embedded across Europe.
It was a clandestine operation that served the king and the king alone.
That same year that Ian was recruited into its ranks.
It was the beginning of a lifetime of adventure,
intrigue and extreme mortal danger.
In August of 1756, a Slen androgynous stepped out of a carriage in St.
Petersburg, ready to start his new life.
His shadow employers couldn't depict a better city.
It was the reign of Elizabeth. The time of change and transformations,
Russia embarked upon a second age of enlightenment.
And nowhere was this feeling of change better captured than Elizabeth's weekly
dancers known as met officer balls.
These dancers were one of the highlights of St.
Petersburg high society held every Tuesday.
They saw all the women dress up as men and all the men dress up.
As women though masks were allowed to be worn and everyone was under implicit
instructions to arrive in the best,
most convincing drag that money could buy as an Natas age, the French embassy,
it's certain that the Chava attended these bulls.
Given what we know is later life.
It's fascinating to wonder how he felt on those Tuesday evenings,
whether Elizabeth's dancers gave him a safe space to experiments.
At the very least, they made an impact in his earlys. Some Petersburg years,
Deion was ordered to return to France in Cognito. It was as a woman,
he disguised himself to avoid detection yet fascinating as it was the
gender fluid court occupied Don fraction of the Chavas time in Russia.
Most of it was taken up by the more pressing issue of war just days after the
androgynous young man stepped out of his carriage, Frederick,
the greater invaded Saxony thereby kicking off the seven years war known in the
us as the French and Indian war. It was one of the first,
truly global conflicts fighting took place on five continents and involved
nearly all of the great powers of the day.
Naturally that included both France and Russia as partners against Russia and
Britain Pariss and Petersburg had a mutual interest in keeping the other in the
war that led to the Shal undertaking all sorts of secret missions for him using
his clout with Elizabeth to stop her attacking France's Ottoman allies to
clandestinely sabotaging a Russian bit for peace,
but apparently just being a spy wasn't enough for Deion four years into the
conflict. He decided to go fight on the front lines.
Now this was easier said than done. The Chave had to beg the secrets head.
The count of probably to be allowed to sign up as a soldier.
Roby was so hesitant to place an asset in the firing line that it took until
1761 for to eon to wear him down, wear him down. He did.
And so it was that on may the 18th, the young man joined the drag goons.
What followed was a half year of adventure in his short time as a soldier to eon
took part in countless battles, earning a reputation for bravery.
In one instance, he led a small horse,
the captured hundreds of PRS in one go in another.
He was wounded during a skirmish,
something which only enhanced his standing yet.
It wasn't the fighting itself that would change the course of Deon's life,
but a small incident during the war one. So petty,
it barely seemed worth noting in August roll dispatched the Chava to deliver
an order to the count of gushy.
And for fortunate GHI was part of a ke at the court that was allied with Madam
Pompadur bro was from a opposing faction. So rather than being all like, sure,
thanks for the message GHI gave to Ian dressing down and told him to stick his
orders up, his Dar.
And then he kicked him out from that moment on Ian would carry a special hatred
in his heart for gushy, that sort of burning rage.
We sometimes we offer people we'll no, we'll never meet again,
but it may just feel like trash little did anyone know?
But that meeting again was absolutely something the Chava and GHI were destined
to do
In the end Deon's military career only lasted seven months that January 17,
62 Elizabeth of Russia died.
And the secret initially recalled him to Petersburg. We say initially,
because after the Chava had already racked up insane debts preparing for the
move, his orders suddenly changed. The war was over.
Now the secret wanted him not to go to Russia, but to London,
a part of the team negotiating piece with or II Deon was required to act as a
liaison between Kings while also gathering intelligence on the British.
He did so well that he was given the French equivalent of a ignited,
the title Shal. So good news,
their patterns annoyed about me saying Shal the whole way through now his title
is legit. So you can all calm down. Peace concluded.
The secret asked to eon to stay on in Britain, ostensibly,
this was to promote Paris's interests abroad,
but really it was to prepare for a French invasion.
One to eon was informed of in a series of letters. In the meantime, though,
the Chava took to London like an Englishman takes to weather as planet
century minister Aon was the diplomatic link between France and Britain.
That meant becoming a fixture of king George's court,
making connections with the rich and powerful and living a life of luxury,
always dressed in his go's uniform. The Chava became a hit on London,
social scene,
challenging people to deals and boasting of his wartime exploits by the fall of
1763 D or on was a minor celebrity among the English upper class as a role.
He clearly relished.
So you can imagine his horror and he received two very unpleasant bits of news.
The first this, he was going to be replaced as plaintiff century minister.
The seconds that his replacement was going to be that gigantic,
ask the counter gushy Deon took one, look at his new orders and said,
hell no, fuming over ghis treatment of him in the war.
Deion refused to resign as minister where ghis bed turned up, trying to be like,
come on date. This is an order, man, you gotta follow it.
The Shal told them to stick their orders up.
Their Collins challenged them to a du, but it was when gushy himself waited in.
Things really blew up. Now in London,
the counts invited Deonna over for a meal to trying straighten things out,
Australia accepted and then returned from the meeting,
telling everyone that GIA had tried to drug kidnap and assassinate him for the
British press. This was the story they didn't even know they'd been waiting for.
Deion was so theatrical and is broad sides against GCI.
So cutting that the feud became a sensation.
It helped that GIA was representing the French meaning the Chava tags could be
sold as a kick in the hated Louis the 15th. Not,
not that it was only London as you saw it that way in early 1764 fed up with the
escalating row. Louis stripped de on of his pension.
Andd an extradition warrant against him.
Although the British CLE ignored the extradition request,
the Southern cancellation of his funds left the Shal a tight spot.
All of which explains his drastic. Next step.
They marched Ian published all of his diplomatic correspondence,
including personal letters from GHI the English public believed it was yet
another attempt to humiliate the humorous French courts.
But those in the secret knew it carried a much darker threat.
The only letters Ian didn't publish were those relating to the top secret Anne
for invading Britain.
And now he was hinting to the public that he might have even more letters to
reveal. There was a blatant attempt of blackmail,
an agent of the crown holding his country's plans,
hostage to defend his pension and title.
The Chava was going to go toe to toe with king Lou self. Now,
before we continue with today's video, let me thank our sponsor.
Curiosity stream.
Curiosity stream is a subscription streaming that offers thousands of
documentaries and nonfiction titles from some of the world's best filmmakers,
including exclusive originals.
Think of it as the Netflix for nerds or the Hulu for history
buffs, curiosity stream is available on many platforms and web apps,
including Roku, Android, Xbox one smart TVs, iOS Chromecast, Amazon fire,
Amazon Kinsel and apple TV. It's offered worldwide.
And it's constantly outdated with amazing timely content. For example,
in may curiosity stream, imagine a documentary called the silence,
saviors a documentary that details how everyday citizens helped French Jews as
the art season invaded in 1940. Or if you're enjoying today's video,
maybe a preferred check out curiosity streams,
six part docu series women who made history.
I think you'll find some more tales of intriguing,
less known Europeans who lived fascinating lives. There.
You can go to curiosity,
stream.com/biographics for unlimited access to the world's top documentaries and
nonfiction series. That is a special deal.
Right now you can use the promo code biographics to save 25% off the cost of an
annual subscription, which comes out to only $14 99 cents a year,
which is well crazy cheap. So click the link below, or just go to curiosity,
stream.com/biographics. And let's get back to the video.
The next months passed in a SW of intrigue. When his gambit to get gushy fired,
fell through Deion uped, his demands telling the king,
he now needed all debts that accrued in his aborted move to Russia paid off too.
In return Paris allowed gushy to file a libel suit against the Chava.
When a guilty verdict was returned, he was declared an outlaw,
but the trouble with trying to reign in spices that well less
spies rather than be captured, eon,
disguised himself as a woman and fled to the village of by fleet there from the
house of a British MP, he waged a secret war against his enemies.
The first was to go to gushy in 1765,
the Shali managed to find someone who'd swear in court that gushy had hired them
to kill him.
It wasn't true that the outrage of the British press was so great at GU she's
house was attacked by Lynch mob with a new ambassador.
Now effectively a prisoner in his own home, Deon resumed,
his clandestine activities,
passing more and more information on Britain's elite to broadly.
It was a classic Caron stick approach with the Chava using broadly to show the
king,
all this juicy car information that he could provide while constantly waving the
stick of blackmail outrageous as it was. It totally worked in 1766.
Louis finally caved. He recalls gushy de France,
let eon keep his position of planet,
potentially minister and offered him a pension of 12,000 Lira.
When the Shali said he wanted more, he was basically told, look, dude,
you're won, but you're gonna win on my terms.
Take this money and shut up before I send someone to assassinate you. For real,
the Shali wisely took the money crucially though he didn't end over the
incriminating invasion letters, keeping them back as insurance.
It was a decision that would utterly transform the second half of his life.
For the next four years,
there was an uneasy truce between the Shali a and the king,
but then in 1770 something strange happened in rumors began to swell that the
Shal was not only appeared to be that his androgynous appearance wasn't because
he was a feminine man, because he was actually female.
Although Ian denied these rumors, they grew stronger by 1772.
The London stock exchange was officially taking bets on the chimal gender.
If you're feeling a little confused about this video's sudden change of gear.
Well, you are not alone for a long time.
Historians wondered if the gender rumors had been spread by the secret as a way
of discrediting their rogue agents today, though,
this is thought unlikely afterwards,
Ian was biologically male petty wanted to dispel rumors that he was a, she,
he had to do was drop his pants and say, da da.
The fact that he didn't has led quite a few people to suspect a far stranger
source for the rumors, the Chava himself it's here.
That speculation gets really interesting.
We've already seen Deon experiment with being in both boy mode and girl mode,
but what if he now realized he wanted to stop experimenting and settle as her?
And what if the most foolproof way to secure this transition was by convincing
the public that she had been a girl posing as a boy all along. Remember,
this is a time when everyone knows the Jonar legend,
a legend that still occasionally inspired young girls to dress up as boys to
fight just two decades before Hannah Snell had caused a sensation in Englands.
When she revealed that she'd done exactly that in the colonial wars against
France today,
we have no way of knowing what was really going through the Shali A's mind,
whether the gender rumors were part of an intricate plan or just a happy
accident.
But we do know where it ended up the Shali a would ride these rumors until the
entire world came to accept her as female.
It was October 17, 75. When the play ride Pierre Burma,
she stepped off the boat in England and prepared to strike a deals call the last
year or so. Dizzying would be a hell of an understatement on may the 10th,
1774 Louis the 15th had gone to the great Versey in the sky,
leaving Louis the 16th in charge.
The new Louis had wasted no time dismantling the secret. As part of disclosure,
the king had tried to finally repatriate the Chava to eon de France,
to get ahold of the blackmail letters.
It offered an additional payout and a guarantee of safe conduct only for the
Chava to declare no and demand both 250,000 Libra.
And to keep the title of plaintiff century minister Luther,
the 16th had cut the insulin spy off,
then had come the gunshots.
The one held all the way around the world and his calculations had suddenly
changed on April the 19th, 1775.
The battle of Lexington and Concord had marked the opening of America's
revolutionary war.
Suddenly spies with access to Britain's elite were in high demand.
Solu demanded that someone cut a deal with this damage value. And now I'm here.
Bur mache was on his way to London, ready to strike that deal.
It would be one of the strangest agreements in French legal history.
Taking note of the rumors,
flying around the British capital bur mache decided to make them integral to his
approach. In return,
you have to stop pretending to be male and live the rest of your life as the
woman that you really are to the surprise eyes of everybody. The Shal air said,
are we today is unknown exactly what the thinking was behind this unusual deal.
It's possible by Marsha really believed the rumor is about the eons gender and
decided this was the quickest way to end her charades.
But that does seem unlikely.
Bo Mae had gone to the stock exchange and laid money on the Chave being female.
When Ian took his deal,
Bo Mae had taken those running the pool to court to get his payout there.
He had produced witnesses who swore that seen Ian's naked female body.
Except that can't be true.
Since we already know Deion was biologically male presum believe Bo Mae knew his
witnesses were lying.
So why did he cut this gender bending deal incredibly something to eon proposed
to herself while in public,
she threatened to fight a deal with Bo Mae over a male identity.
There's no getting around the simple fact that she could have easily asserted
her maleness if she wanted to. So we're left assuming that she didn't want to,
but she wanted to live at as female.
And that's exactly what happened in August, 1777,
the Chava Ian returned to her native France.
Now female in the eyes of the law society at large sorrow is a modern drone of
ag dressing as a man to find the British and to claim that she was born
biologically female,
but raised male was repeated foreign white in a strange way.
This perhaps allowed her to enjoy the best of both genders.
Although the terms of the agreement stripped out of the title plan of
potentially minister, for the simple reason,
women couldn't hold the role and forbid her from wearing her beloved male,
military uniform. She wasn't forced to conform to typically female behavior.
She was allowed to drink and socialize alone with men or while also enjoying
these services and Maria Antoinette's private dress maker and being ed female,
perhaps it was just easier for the Chava to adopt this preexisting role,
that of a warrior woman who behaved in a male way,
or maybe society just kind of forced it upon her either way.
She would live as a female for the rest of her life.
Although the Chava now had legal recognition for her gender identity,
her difficulties weren't over eight years after being repatriated to France.
She left again,
settling back in London that she continued to be accepted as female and even
Fort some exhibition duals against men while wearing heavy dresses.
But storm clouds were brewing over a home nation clouds that would soon
unleashed the mother of all lightning bolts. The name of that bolt,
the French revolution even based in Britain.
The early days of the revolution were an exciting time with the Chava she
cheered from across the channel.
The storming of the Bastille when the new national assembly began its March
towards war.
She ran to Paris and offered to lead nor female fighting force to defend French
on. She was turned down.
But as anyone who's ever heard of the French revolution already knows things.
Wouldn't stay exciting for much longer. In August, 1792,
a gang of radicals led by maxil Roberts,
Pierre and George deto staged insurrection taking control of France. From there.
It was a short bloody March to the arrival of Madam guillotine and the studies
sunk of severe heads, tumbling into baskets.
The reign of terror Ian's family estates confiscated and her sister and mother
guillotines.
It also saw the annulment of the deal that she struck with Bo mache.
The one granting her a pension and allowing her back into France for the rest of
her life. The Chava would live like Aless EXR. Yeah,
she would also keep on living as a female.
This is why series that female identity was something forced on Deion by Mar or
the king. Don't add up with the king dead Bo Mar and exile.
And the agreement in tats, Deon was no longer bound by any of its stipulations.
The fact that she spent the next 17 years identifying only as a woman
strengthens the argument that this was who she really was.
As France fell into chaos, the Chava struggled to stay afloat in London.
A first she fought jewels for money and took part in fencing competitions,
but a Arabia injury, but paid to that by the end of the decade,
she was living with a widow Mary Cole,
who may have been her lover and eating out in existence on the edge of society.
She even wound up going to prison from paid debts.
And although she tried to out an autobiography to raise funds,
it went unpublished in a lifetime come a final years,
Deion was pawing off everything she owned just to stay solvent.
The Chava Ian died at home with Mary Cole on may the 21st 1810.
When her body was examined, it was noted.
She had male reproductive organs described in and now famous quote,
as in every respect, perfectly formed her generations of historians.
That was enough to declare her decades spent as a woman, a hoax today, though,
we tend to see the Shal story differently. Here was someone who,
despite being born,
biologically male fought in one for the right to be recognized. As female,
even in the modern world,
France says only recently allowed such legal recognition in the era de Ian
lived. This was just about unprecedented,
but even aside from her pioneering gender status, the story of the Chava,
Ian remains fascinating in the last decades of the Enion regime,
she lived a life exciting enough to fill a dozen adventure novels, uh,
life of espionage, betrayal, and secrecy, all set against a backdrop of war.
She may not be the biggest name this channel has ever covered,
but the story of these Sheva shows us that sometimes history's most fascinating
tales are also its least well known.
So I really hope you enjoy today's video.
Thank you again to curiosity stream for making it possible.
What other quick plug here at the end,
if you enjoy stories like this that are both interesting and important, please,
do you make sure that you check out my new channel explored.
They is a link to that below and thank you for watching.